Specify Base Profile (#12)
qir-alliance/qir-spec: specification/under_development/profiles/Base_Profile.md

The intention is for frontends to emit programs that comply with the QIR specification, and for a compilation stage to then target this QIR to comply with the Base Profile specification. This targeting is possible in principle if the program doesn't make use of any features that would require hardware support. 

To support execution of Base Profile compliant programs, a backend must have the following fundamental capabilities:
1. It supports executing a sequence of quantum instructions that transforms the quantum state.
2. It supports measuring the state of each qubit at the end of a computation.
3. It must be able to return the measured value for each qubit in the order requested by the program. This can be done in software as a post processing step after all quantum instructions and the final measurements have been performed; it does not require hardware or runtime support.

> TODO: edit the third bullet to just say that it needs to be able to produce one of the define output formats? Are all output formats equivalent (I think so, *if* the labeling scheme is defined)?  

Author: I edited the bullet and fleshed out a section that describes what we had discussed.

The code below illustrates how a simple program looks like within a Base Profile representation:

```llvm
; type definitions

%Result = type opaque
%Qubit = type opaque

; global constants (labels for output recording)

@0 = internal constant [16 x i8] c"label_schema_id\00"
@1 = internal constant [3 x i8] c"r1\00"
@2 = internal constant [3 x i8] c"r2\00"

; entry point definition

define i64 @Entry_Point_Name() #0 {
entry:

  ; calls to QIS functions  
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, %Result* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*), %Result* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*))

  ; calls to record the program output

>   tail call void @__quantum__rt__initialize_record_output(i8* getelementptr inbounds ([16 x i8], [16 x i8]* @0, i32 0, i32 0))  

Reviewer: Under the assumption that the base profile should represent the minimal instruction set any one of the current providers have, `getelementptr` is not supported.

Likewise, `__quantum__rt__initialize_record_output` is not currently [listed](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qat/blob/main/qir/qat/ValidationPass/ValidationPassConfiguration.cpp) in any profile.

Author: Yes, these are deviations from/updates to the current implementation that we (this workstream) suggest.

>   tail call void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64 2, i8* null)

Reviewer: Same for `__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output`.

>   tail call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* null, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @1, i32 0, i32 0))

Reviewer: Pointer type `i8*` is not allowed by any provider at this point.

Author: With this update, it would meant that string labels are always injected and allowed (only) as arguments in output recording functions. A backend may ignore them. See the doc for more detail.

Reviewer: How come the choice for string labels as opposed to integer labels? Integer labels seems like a better compatibility choice assuming that these instructions might one day be executed directly on the QPU.

  tail call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @2, i32 0, i32 0))

  ret i64 0
}

; declarations of QIS functions

declare void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit*, %Qubit*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit*, %Result*)

; declarations of functions used for output recording

declare void @__quantum__rt__initialize_record_output(i8*)

declare void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64, i8*)

declare void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result*, i8*)

; attributes

> attributes #0 = { "entry_point" "required_qubits"="2" "required_results"="2" }

Author: They are revised for consistency.

```

> TODO: do we need additional restrictions for output recording? Like e.g. it needs to be a dedicated block, or output recording functions can only occur in the last block of the entry point?

Reviewer: A base profile program can only have a single block since `br` is not [supported](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qat/blob/main/qir/qat/ValidationPass/ValidationPassConfiguration.cpp) by at least one profile at this point.

Author: Again, a deviation from the current implementation; this spec is not intended to capture precisely the current implementation, but instead the current implementation should be considered a draft implementation that informs the spec. The final spec as drafted here may deviate and closes gaps/issues we discover by having a draft implementation.

TODO: do we need a __quantum__rt__initialize and __quantum__rt__finalize?

> TODO: do measurements need to be at the end of the quantum computations, or should the backend take care of deferring them if necessary?

Reviewer: It should be irrelevant where the measurements are as the effectively are `noop` on backends that does one-shot measurements of all states at the end. A measurement of a qubit should make that a  qubit is not allowed to be used for the remainder of the program since that would alter the state.

Author: This has been discussed in the working group, and requiring them to occur at the end of the block seemed cleaner - the bottom line is that someone will have to pull them down, and we can choose whether to put that responsibility on the compiler that generates the Base Profile or the the backend that executes it. We think going with the former makes more sense and is cleaner.

TODO: a profile identifier and version number within the IR would be good to have (may be needed for correct usage of qubit and result pointers)   
-> look into custom target triples

## Entry Point Definition

The bitcode contains the definition of the LLVM function that should be invoked when the program is executed, 
refered to as entry point in the rest of this profile specification. 
The name of this function may be chosen freely, as long as it is a valid 
[global identifier](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#identifiers) by LLVM standard. 

> The entry point may not take any parameters and must return an exit code in the form of a 64-bit integer. The exit code 0 must be used to indicate a successful execution of the program. 

Reviewer: This is contradicting a later section which states that the function is void.

Author: I believe the section on requirements for a QIS to be compatible with the Base Profile states that QIS functions need to return void. I believe nothing in the document states that the entry point needs to return void.

### Attributes

The following custom attributes must be attached to the entry point function:

> - An attribute named "EntryPoint" that does not 

Reviewer 2: What does it not?

Reviewer: Name `EntryPoint` is inconsistent with demo program and later program, but consistent with the current convention.

Author: The doc is not updated and read for detailed review.

- An attribute indicating the total number of qubits used by the program
- An attribute indicating the total number of classical bits required throughout the program to store measurement outcomes

These attributes will show up as an [attribute group](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.1/docs/LangRef.html#attrgrp) in the IR.
Attribute groups are numbered such that they can be easily referenced by multiple function definitions or global variables. 

> Arbitrary custom attributes may be optionally attached to any of the declared functions to convey additional information about that function. Consumers of Base Profile compliant programs should hence not rely on the numbering of the entry point attribute group, but instead look for function to which an attribute with the name `entry_point` is attached to determine which one to invoke when the program is launched.

Reviewer: Naming `entry_point` is inconsistent with previous section where it was `EntryPoint` and is also inconsistent with the current convention by Q# that uses `EntryPoint`.

Author: updated, with `entry_point` being the intended naming.

To indicate the total number of qubits required to execute the program, a custom attribute with the name `required_qubits` is defined and attached to the entry point. To indicate the number of registers/bits needed to store measurement results during program execution, a custom attribute with the name `required_results` is defined and attached to the entry point. The value of both of these attributes is the string representation of a 64-bit integer constant.

TODO: why the string value, and not an integer?   
TODO: no double underscore guard for attributes likely makes sense

### Function Body

> The function body consists of a single block named `entry`. This implies in particular that no branching is permitted inside a function's body.

Reviewer: Why does the name of the block matter?

Author: It doesn't. The text has been updated.

In the `entry` block, any number of calls to QIS functions may be performed.
To be compatible with the Base Profile these functions must return void. 
Any arguments to invoke them must be inlined into the call itself; 
they hence must be constants or a pointer to a [qubit or result]()
The result of the program execution should be logged using output recording functions.

The following instructions are the *only* LLVM instructions that are permitted within a Base Profile compliant program:

| LLVM Instruction                  | Context and Purpose         | Rules for Usage |
|---------------------------|-------------------|-------------|
| `call`    | Used within a function block to invoke any one of the declared QIS functions and the output recording functions. | May optionally be preceded by a [`tail` marker](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#call-instruction). |
| `ret` | Used to return the exit code of the program. | Must occur (only) as the final instruction of the `entry` block. |
| `inttoptr` | Used to cast an `i64` integer value to either a `%Qubit*` or a `%Result*`. | May be used as part of a function call only. |

> | `getelementptr inbounds` | Used to create an `i8*` to pass a constant string for the purpose of labeling an output value. | May be used as part of call to an output recording function only. |

Reviewer: `getelementptr` is not supported by any of the [current profiles](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qat/blob/main/qir/qat/ValidationPass/ValidationPassConfiguration.cpp) neither is pointer type `i8*`.

Author: See my reply on another conversation.

## Data Types and Values

Within the base profile, defining local variables is not supported. Arguments to calls correspondingly are expected to be constant values. 

> Qubits and results are passes as a pointer of type `%Qubit*` and `%Result*` respectively, where the pointer itself rather than the memory location identifies the qubit or result: For the purpose of passing them as arguments in function calls, a 64-bit signed integer value is cast to the appropriate pointer type. The signed integer that is case must be in the interval `[0, nrQubits)` for `%Qubit*` and `[0, nrResults)` for `%Result*`, where `nrQubits` and `nrResults` are the required number of qubits and results defined by entry point attributes.

Reviewer 3: We've talked about the base profile being a proper subset of all extended profiles. Does this mean that for any future profiles (even those that directly support dynamic qubit allocation function calls that return %Result* values to a virtual register), this indexing format of casting integers to pointers needs to be supported?

Author: Casting int to point is a way to accurately reflect program intent for quantum programming frameworks that allow to express the same (i.e. frameworks where you e.g. have $0 to identify a qubit). The way it is intended to work is that it is a strict either-or choice; qubits are either encoding a qubit id and they are not pointing to a valid memory location, or they are actual pointers and the runtime manages them. As written, the Base Profile requires to use the former, while the intent for the full spec and other profiles is that either one may be chosen by the frontend. No longer supporting the const int to pointer I think is something to discuss when we have more experience with backends managing qubits.

Let me know what you think.

> Only the `%Qubit` and `%Result` data types are required to be supported by all backends. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only the `%Qubit*` and `%Result*` pointer data types are required to be supported by all backends. 
```
We never use `%Qubit`, only the pointer `%Qubit*`.

Author: fixed.

Integers and double-precision floating point numbers are available as in full QIR;

> however, computations using these numeric types are not available.

Reviewer: At least from the perspective of how things currently work: Yes, we have support for literals of any type (at the moment) such that you could have `qis` functions that would take an angle, tolerance etc. in addition to quantum registers. It is the expectation that lowering of the IR to the backends machine code will take care of interpreting the literal and translate it correctly. 

One thing to note though: If the base profile is to represent the common subset of capabilities, then literals are effectively not supported since the [candidate functions](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qat/blob/main/qir/qat/ValidationPass/ValidationPassConfiguration.cpp) of `provider_b340` does not take any argument that is a primitive type. Therefore, while you are allowed to write a literal, you have no place to put.

> however, computations using these numeric types are not available.

Author: Let's carefully distinguish profile from instruction set. The document is now fleshed out a lot further, and I hope I made it clear that basically you can have constants of any type but only as arguments to calls or as the final integer to return. Hence, what constant values can possibly occur is effectively determined by the chosen QIS.

### Qubit and Result Usage

> runtime has autonomoie over how to represent qubits. also for base profile, the runtime is the only entity that needs to know how to interprete the opaque pointers (deref or not). that info is captured in the target triple/duo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The runtime system has autonomy over how to represent qubits. also for base profile, the runtime is the only entity that needs to know how to interpret the opaque pointers (defer or not). that info is captured in the target triple/duo.
```
This contracts the section  "Data Types and Values" where the interpretation of the opaque pointers is unambiguously stated to not be memory locations.

Author: I've fleshed out the explanation of this, and hope it is clear. The runtime still has autonomy over how to represent qubits and results internally - the bitcast of a constant to a pointer is merely a way to reflect application intent.

Qubits may not be used after they have been measured. 
Qubits and results need to be numbered consecutively, starting at 0.
No qpu support needed for measuring individual qubits, but backend would support output selection?

## Quantum Instruction Set

For a Quantum Instruction Set to be compatible with the Base Profile, it needs to satisfy the following requirements:

> - Since the Base Profile doesn't permit to define local variables, all instructions are required to return void. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Since the Base Profile does not permit to define local variables, all instructions are required to return void. 
```
In that case, `__quantum__qis__read_result__body` should be banned from the base profile. Consequently, any record function that does not take a `%Result*` as argument or no arguments should be banned as well since there is no point in recording a literal and there is no possibility of obtaining anything but a `%Result*`

Author: Yes. You will find that the functions you mention are indeed not listed in the base profile, and correspondingly banned.

## Output Recording

Log format is a separate spec. What the i8* can be is a separate spec. Default spec for front-ends to compile into.
TODO: do string labels need to be zero terminated?

The following functions are declared and used to record the program output: 
| Function                  | Signature         | Description |
|---------------------------|-------------------|-------------|
| __quantum__rt__initialize_record_output    | `void(i8*)`  | Inserts a marker in the output log that contains an identifier for the used labeling scheme. The backend may choose which output format to use, and the label identifier is omitted for output formats that do not support labeling. |

> | __quantum__rt__tuple_record_output    | `void(i64, i8*)`  | Inserts a marker in the output log that indicates the start of a tuple and how many tuple elements are going to be logged. The second parameter reflects an label for the tuple. The backend may choose which output format to use. Depending on the used format, the label will be logged or omitted. |

Reviewer 4: the tuple recording and array recording that use an integer to say the length of the record only makes any sense for ordered output. For tagged/labelled output, it doesn't make sense to include these at all, so I'm not sure what function they provide. In the example above, it seems to mix labelled and unlabelled output in a way that doesn't work for execution. Should the example (and the documentation in the table) differentiate between these to avoid confusion from mixing them?

Reviewer 4: I missed the `TODO` below that tries to clarify intent here. If the goal is that the IR has enough information for every style of output, then I think this table should clarify that the markers (in addition to the labels) might be omitted entirely (ie: some of these runtime functions may be a no-op for certain output styles).

Author: To decouple of the IR specification from the output format, I believe that we would indeed expect that the markers are always present in the IR (just like the labels) would always be there, and the backend would choose how to leverage that information to produce the output format of its choice.

Author: I revised this paragraph and hope it is clear now. I haven't fleshed out the spec for the output schemas, but will give that a go in the near future.

Execution of a Base Profile compliant program does not, for instance, require
supporting quantum instructions dependent on measurement outcomes. The only
requirements for a backend are to be able to perform unitary transformations on
the quantum state, as well as measurements at the end of the program.

The intention is for front ends to emit programs that comply with the QIR
specification, and for a compilation stage to then target this QIR to comply
with the Base Profile specification. This targeting is possible in principle if
the program doesn't make use of any features that would require hardware
support.

To support execution of Base Profile compliant programs, a backend must have the
following fundamental capabilities:

1. It supports executing a sequence of quantum instructions that transforms the
   quantum state.
2. It supports measuring the state of each qubit at the end of a computation.
3. It must be able to return the measured value for each qubit in the order
   requested by the program. This can be done in software as a post processing
   step after all quantum instructions and the final measurements have been

>    performed; it does not require hardware or runtime support.

Author: The intend is to spec a small set of possible output schemas a backend can choose from (currently two - one if output is generated async and order is not guaranteed and one that doesn't require string labels -, and I am not sure we will ever need a third one, but I am sure we will update the two). We are effectively asking that a frontend would be able to process either one (e.g. to present visuals instead of the rather verbose raw output), though the tooling to do so can be open and shared.

  tail call void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64 2, i8* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* null, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @1, i32 0, i32 0))
  tail call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @2, i32 0, i32 0))

  ret i64 0
}

; declarations of QIS functions

declare void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit*, %Qubit*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit*, %Result*)

; declarations of functions used for output recording

declare void @__quantum__rt__initialize_record_output(i8*)

declare void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64, i8*)

declare void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result*, i8*)

; attributes

attributes #0 = { "entry_point" "required_qubits"="2" "required_results"="2" }
```

TODO: do we need additional restrictions for output recording? Like e.g. it
needs to be a dedicated block, or output recording functions can only occur in
the last block of the entry point?

TODO: do we need a `__quantum__rt__initialize` and `__quantum__rt__finalize`?

> TODO: do measurements need to be at the end of the quantum computations, or

Author: I think we concluded that measurement indeed need to be at the end also within the IR (rather than going with just the requirement that qubits are not used after measurements). I heavily edited this - please take another look; I believe your comment should be addressed.

should the backend take care of deferring them if necessary?

> TODO: a profile identifier and version number within the IR would be good to

Author: Not yet. We are aiming for defining the 1.0 here - the current version checked in main is at this time more ... source for inspiration, and the detailed profiles we are writing up here are really what is relevant to connect backends. Calling anything that is implemented today 0.1 would be the official version number of it. :)

Attribute groups are numbered such that they can be easily referenced by
multiple function definitions or global variables. Arbitrary custom attributes
may be optionally attached to any of the declared functions to convey additional
information about that function. Consumers of Base Profile compliant programs
should hence not rely on the numbering of the entry point attribute group, but
instead look for function to which an attribute with the name `entry_point` is
attached to determine which one to invoke when the program is launched.

To indicate the total number of qubits required to execute the program, a custom
attribute with the name `required_qubits` is defined and attached to the entry
point. To indicate the number of registers/bits needed to store measurement
results during program execution, a custom attribute with the name
`required_results` is defined and attached to the entry point. The value of both
of these attributes is the string representation of a 64-bit integer constant.

TODO: why the string value, and not an integer? TODO: no double underscore guard
for attributes likely makes sense

### Function Body

> The function body consists of a single block named `entry`. This implies in

Author: We should not rely on block names, and I edited this. 
Re: why use an attribute to mark entry points opposed to require a naming convention: I find that naming conventions - even if it is just for the entry point - get pretty awkward pretty quickly. For one, it might be desirable to support multiple entry points (not as part of the Base Profile), and I see no significant downside to using an attribute. Do you see a reason to prefer naming convention over an attribute?

particular that no branching is permitted inside a function's body. In the
`entry` block, any number of calls to QIS functions may be performed. To be
compatible with the Base Profile these functions must return void. Any arguments
to invoke them must be inlined into the call itself; they hence must be

> constants or a pointer to a [qubit or result]() The result of the program

Author: fixed

execution should be logged using output recording functions.

The following instructions are the *only* LLVM instructions that are permitted
within a Base Profile compliant program:

| LLVM Instruction         | Context and Purpose                                                                                              | Rules for Usage                                                                                       |
| :----------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `call`                   | Used within a function block to invoke any one of the declared QIS functions and the output recording functions. | May optionally be preceded by a [`tail` marker](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#call-instruction). |

> | `ret`                    | Used to return the exit code of the program.                                                                     | Must occur (only) as the final instruction of the `entry` block.                                      |

Author: Indeed, as defined I don't believe there is a way to return an exit code that is not a compile time constant. I don't believe the Base Profile allows for any kind of dynamic failure. Maybe I am missing what you had in mind with the last sentence/question? 

I should also clarify that the exit code is a way to avoid needing support for early termination of the execution for cases where one would usually expect a runtime exception (e.g. division by zero) due to user/program error; i.e. it has a purpose for more advanced profiles, but not really for the Base Profile. The exist code is part of the program output, and specifically, each shot would potentially have a different exit code (histograms can e.g. filter based on exist code). If the job as a whole fails for some reason, or execution fails even though there is nothing that should fail in the program, then there should be a separate handling as part of the job APIs for that. In principle it may be conceivable that there is some handling for the execution "randomly failing" on the QPU on a per-shot basis, and in principle that could be reflected in the produced output. However, given that such a failure in that case would have nothing to do with the program itself, I don't see why that possibility would be reflected in the IR.

| `inttoptr`               | Used to cast an `i64` integer value to either a `%Qubit*` or a `%Result*`.                                       | May be used as part of a function call only.                                                          |
| `getelementptr inbounds` | Used to create an `i8*` to pass a constant string for the purpose of labeling an output value.                   | May be used as part of call to an output recording function only.                                     |

## Data Types and Values

Within the base profile, defining local variables is not supported. Arguments to
calls correspondingly are expected to be constant values.

> Qubits and results are passes as a pointer of type `%Qubit*` and `%Result*`

Author: revised.

respectively, where the pointer itself rather than the memory location
identifies the qubit or result: For the purpose of passing them as arguments in
function calls, a 64-bit signed integer value is cast to the appropriate pointer

> type. The signed integer that is case must be in the interval `[0, nrQubits)`

Author: fixed.

for `%Qubit*` and `[0, nrResults)` for `%Result*`, where `nrQubits` and
`nrResults` are the required number of qubits and results defined by entry point
attributes.

Only the `%Qubit` and `%Result` data types are required to be supported by all
backends.

Integers and double-precision floating point numbers are available as in full
QIR; however, computations using these numeric types are not available.

### Qubit and Result Usage

> runtime has autonomy over how to represent qubits. also for base profile, the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The runtime has autonomy over how to represent qubits. For the base profile, the
```

Author: Fixed with the revised version.

> runtime has autonomy over how to represent qubits. also for base profile, the

Author: I actually removed any reference to a runtime, and instead am using the terms front- and backend when necessary. I hope that should be clear enough and avoid confusion.

runtime is the only entity that needs to know how to interpret the opaque

> pointers (deref or not). that info is captured in the target triple/duo.

Author: edited.

Qubits may not be used after they have been measured. Qubits and results need to
be numbered consecutively, starting at 0. No qpu support needed for measuring

> individual qubits, but backend would support output selection?

Reviewer 5: This sentence needs clarification.

Author: Agreed. It should be clarified now.

## Quantum Instruction Set

For a Quantum Instruction Set to be compatible with the Base Profile, it needs
to satisfy the following requirements:

> - Since the Base Profile doesn't permit to define local variables, all
>   instructions are required to return void.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The Base Profile doesn't permit the definition of local variables, all
  instructions are required to return void.
```

Author: I edited that as well to make it more explicit what the requirements are.

## Output Recording

Log format is a separate spec. What the i8* can be is a separate spec. Default
spec for front-ends to compile into. TODO: do string labels need to be zero
terminated?

The following functions are declared and used to record the program output: |
Function                  | Signature         | Description |
|---------------------------|-------------------|-------------| |
__quantum__rt__initialize_record_output    | `void(i8*)`  | Inserts a marker in

> the output log that contains an identifier for the used labeling scheme. The

Reviewer 5: I do not believe the output log has been defined at this point.

Author: The document now contains a bunch of clarifications regarding output schemas. I updated all mentioned of "output format" and "log"  to hopefully make it clear and consistent terminology. Please take another look and let me know if anything is unclear.

backend may choose which output format to use, and the label identifier is
omitted for output formats that do not support labeling. | |
__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output    | `void(i64, i8*)`  | Inserts a marker in
the output log that indicates the start of a tuple and how many tuple elements
are going to be logged. The second parameter reflects an label for the tuple.
The backend may choose which output format to use. Depending on the used format,
the label will be logged or omitted. | | __quantum__rt__array_record_output    |
`void(i64, i8*)`  | Inserts a marker in the output log that indicates the start
of an array and how many array elements are going to be logged. The second
parameter reflects an label for the array. The backend may choose which output
format to use. Depending on the used format, the label will be logged or
omitted. | |__quantum__rt__result_record_output   | `void(%Result*, i8*)`  |
Adds a measurement result to the output log. The second parameter reflects an
label for the result value. The backend may choose which output format to use.

> Depending on the used format, the label will be logged or omitted. |

Reviewer 5: We should try and format this markdown table to be more human readable in `.md` form using a MD table formatting tool.

Reviewer 5: On second note it is also rendering incorrectly on Github.

Author: Done.

TODO: It is sufficient to use the same functions for output recording
independent on the output format; i.e. the output format does not need to be
reflected in the IR, and it is sufficient to label the format it in the output
itself. The output itself then needs to contain both the output format
identifier (defined by the backend), as well as an identifier for the labeling
scheme (as defined in the program IR itself). -> for base profile, no
computations (classical or quantum, including calls to rt functions other than
record_output* functions) can be performed after the call to

> __quantum__rt__initialize_record_output

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure there has been sufficient discussion of classical vs quantum computations and there separation so far in the base profile?

Author: The notes that this comment applied to have been removed and replaced by hopefully comprehensive text. I think your comment might be addressed. There is currently only one mention of classical computations, and it's at the beginning of the Data Types and Values section. Please take a look and confirm if this addressed your concern.

# Base Profile

This profile defines a subset of the QIR specification to support a coherent set
of functionalities and capabilities that might be offered by a quantum backend.
Like all profile specifications, this document is primarily intended for
[compiler backend](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler#Back_end) authors as
well as contributors to the [targeting
stage](../Compilation_And_Targeting.md#targeting) of the QIR compiler.

The Base Profile specifies the minimal requirements for executing a quantum
program. Specifically, to execute a Base Profile compliant program, a backend
needs to support the following:

1. It can execute a sequence of quantum instructions that transform the quantum
   state.
2. It supports measuring the state of each qubit at the end of the program.
3. It produces one of the specified [output schemas](../output_schemas/).

> These functionalities are both necessary and sufficient for computations that

Reviewer 6: "both" but there are now three items.

Author: The both was intended to refer to "necessary" and "sufficient", but I just remove it; that is clearer in any case.

fundamentally consist of unitary transformations of the quantum state as well as
measurements at the end of the program. More details about each of the bullets
are outlined below.

**Bullet 1: Quantum transformations** <br/>

The set of available instructions that transform the quantum state may vary
depending on the targeted backend. The profile specification defines how to
leverage and combine the available instructions to express a program, but does
not dictate which quantum instructions may be used. Targeting a program to a
specific backend requires choosing a suitable profile and quantum instruction
set (QIS). Both can be chosen largely independently, though certain instruction
sets may be incompatible with this (or other) profile(s). The section on the

> [quantum instruction set](#quantum-instruction-set) below defines the criterion

Reviewer 6: "criterion" => "criteria" since there are many requirements? Or use "requirements" instead?

Author: Thanks, fixed.

for a QIS to be compatible with the Base Profile. More information about the
role of the QIS, recommendations for front- and backend providers, as well as
the distinction between runtime functions and quantum instructions can be found
in [this document](../Instruction_Set.md).

**Bullet 2: Measurements** <br/>

The second requirement should be taken to mean that a Base Profile compliant
program does *not* apply instructions to a qubit after it has been measured; all

> instructions to transform the quantum state can be applied before performing any

Reviewer 6: "can be applied" => "must be applied"?

Author: agreed & edited.

- Executing a Base Profile compliant program does not require support for
applying quantum instructions dependent on measurement outcomes.

**Bullet 3: Program output** <br />

The specification of QIR and all its profiles needs to permit to accurately
reflect the program intent. This includes being able to define and customize the
program output. The Base Profile specification hence requires explicitly
expressing which values/measurements are returned by the program and in which
order. How to express this is defined in the section on [output
recording](#output-recording).

While it is sufficient for the QPU to do a final measurement of all qubits in a
predefined order at the end of the program, only the selected subset will be
reflected in the produced output schema. A suitable output schema can be
generated in a post-processing step after the computation on the quantum
processor itself has completed; customization of the program output hence does
not require support on the QPU itself.

The defined [output schemas](../output_schemas/) provide different options for
how a backend may express the computed value(s). The exact schema can be freely

> chosen by the backend and is identified by a string label in the produced

Reviewer 6: "chosen by the backend" => Philosophical question: Depending on the meaning of "backend" elsewhere, is it the "backend" that chooses, or some library handling the backend, or the developer, or the compiler, or else?

Author: Backend here means the entity that responds to the request to execute the Base Profile compliant code. Most likely/commonly, I actually expect that this will be the service (of a hardware provider) that chooses.

schema. Each output schema contains sufficient information to allow quantum

> programming frameworks to generate a user friendly presentation of the returned

Reviewer 6: "user friendly" => "user-friendly"?

Author: done.

values in the requested order, such as, e.g., a histogram of all results when
running the program multiple times.

## Program Structure

> A Base Profile compliant program is defined in the form of a single LLVM bitcode

Reviewer 6: "single LLVM bitcode file" => Bitcode is only one of the possible formats for IR. I guess the human-readable version would be valid too for compliance-checking. "single LLVM file"? "single LLVM IR file"? "single LLVM/QIR file"?

Author: No, the human readable format is there for human convenience. However, only the bitcode gives certain guarantees with respect to compatibility. Hence, the requirement is actually explicitly that it is a bitcode file rather than a .ll file. At the same time, it would be rather hard to write the spec without showing llvm snippets in human readable form. I was hoping the paragraph in this section would clarify that the human readable form is merely there for clarity and only the bitcode is expected to be processed.

; module flags

!llvm.module.flags = !{!0, !1, !2, !3}

!0 = !{i32 1, !"qir_major_version", i32 1}
!1 = !{i32 7, !"qir_minor_version", i32 0}
!2 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_qubit_management", i1 false}
!3 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_result_management", i1 false}
```

The program entangles two qubits, measures them, and returns a tuple with the
two measurement results.

For the sake of clarity, the code above does not contain any [debug
symbols](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.0/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/LangImpl09.html?highlight=debug%20symbols).
Debug symbols contain information that is used by a debugger to relate failures
during execution back to the original source code. While we expect this to be
primarily useful for execution on simulators, debug symbols are both easy to
ignore and may be useful to generate helpful error messages for compilation
failures that happen only late in the process. We hence see no reason to
disallow them from occurring in the bitcode but will not detail their use any
further. We defer to existing resources for more information about how to
generate and use debug symbols.

## Entry Point Definition

> The bitcode contains the definition of the LLVM function that should be invoked

Reviewer 6: "The bitcode" => Here again, I wonder whether mentioning "bitcode" only is the right thing to do when the human-readable version is considered equivalent in LLVM logic.
"the LLVM function" => I have a doubt. Did we stick to having only one "internal" function? Do we mention that clearly somewhere here?

Author: Re bitcode: see my comment above - human readable and bitcode are not fully equivalent, and the requirement is for it to be bitcode.

Re one function: Yes, I believe we clearly state that the base profile will have only one function + declarations (but not definitions!) for the used QIS and RT functions.

Reviewer 7: Saying that the bitcode and human readable form at NOT fully equivalent seems like poor practice to me.  Even if in current practical implementations this is a restriction due to test coverage not finding all the issues, why wouldn't you want to state that the two should map one-to-one as a stated goal?  In my opinion, this is a very important criterion for a robust system. But perhaps you just don't want to make it a requirement for the Base profile at this time?  Still ...

Author: @rtvuser1 I don't believe this is strictly within our power; this is up to LLVM - we are just "inheriting" the behavior here. I don't think we can or should try to limit what we use to the pieces that are strictly equivalent; I don't think we can predict evolution of LLVM in that regard.

when the program is executed, referred to as entry point in the rest of this
profile specification. The name of this function may be chosen freely, as long
as it is a valid [global
identifier](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#identifiers) by LLVM standard.

The entry point may not take any parameters and must return an exit code in the
form of a 64-bit integer. The exit code `0` must be used to indicate a

> successful execution of the program.

Reviewer 6: What if execution is not succesful? Could it return anything else anyhow? Not being allowed to branch and QIS functions not returning anything, it will be hard to set a return value. Unless we use tricky workarounds (see [this discussion](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec/discussions/15)). Maybe we should say it always return 0?

Author: As you point out, I don't see how the Base Profile could return anything but 0. The intent to return it regardless is to be consistent with other profiles that can return a meaningful exit code.

Reviewer 7: Is there not any case in which the Base Profile execution would return an error code?  Are you thinking that all errors would be captured in compilation phase? what if the code fails on a provider's system because they have not properly implemented some feature and the control system exits prematurely.  Seems like there must be some cases where a failure code could surface, not from the QIS code, but from the control system itself?

Author: @rtvuser1 I agree, but I don't quite see how that could or should be reflected in the IR. We could consider adding a sentence that a backend may choose to replace the program defined exit code if there was an execution failure, but I am not sure it is the right thing to do; maybe this should not be covered by the IR spec, but instead part of a service/job API?

### Attributes

The following custom attributes must be attached to the entry point function:

- An attribute named `"entry_point"` identifying the function as the starting
  point of a quantum program
- An attribute name `"qir_profile"` with the value `"base_profile"` identifying
  the profile the entry point has been compiled for

> - An attribute name `"output_labels"` with an arbitrary string value that

Reviewer 6: "name" => "named", both for "qir_profile" and "output_labels".

Author: ups, thanks. fixed.

  the entry point
- An attribute named `"required_results"` indicating the maximal number of
  measurement results that need to be stored while executing the entry point
  function

Optionally, additional attributes may be attached to the entry point. Any custom
function attributes attached to the entry point will be reflected as metadata in
the program output; this includes both mandatory and optional attributes but not
parameter attributes or return value attributes. This in particular implies that
the [labeling schema](#output-recording) used in the recorded output can be
identified by looking at the metadata in the produced output. See the
specification of the [output schemas](../output_schemas/) for more information
about how metadata is represented in the output schema.

Custom function attributes will show up as part of an [attribute
group](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.1/docs/LangRef.html#attrgrp) in the IR.
Attribute groups are numbered such that they can be easily referenced by
multiple function definitions or global variables. Consumers of Base Profile
compliant programs must not rely on a particular numbering, but instead look for

> function to which an attribute with the name `"entry_point"` is attached to

Reviewer 6: "for function" => "for the function"

Author: fixed

> determine which one to invoke when the program is launched.

Reviewer 6: BTW, what if this "entry_point" attribute is given to several functions? I'm not sure we mentioned this is forbidden.

Reviewer 7: I would have thought that the entry point would be treated specially, like program parameters. A program is compiled, and then the user might want to have the option to specify any one of several entry points at run-time.  How would you envision this entry point attribute would be specified?  Must I do this prior to compilation?  That seems to limit flexibility.  Of course, there may be reasons or precedent in this LLVM space that suggests this attribute approach.  Not objecting, but I am just raising the question ... would it be better to have a dynamic entry point that is selectable on execution, not fixed during compile to one entry point?

Author: This is in interesting question. I expect that in the future there will be profiles that permit for multiple entry points. However, in the end, I believe it is more practical to require a compile time annotation to indicate the entry point(s). The reason is that there is a lot of compilation happening to getting the program simplified to match a profile (this one or others) - e.g. we aggressively constant fold (think of arrays that are commonly used in a program, even when they are not directly supported by a backend) and we inline/unroll loops as needed. With aggressive inlining for example, it is rather impractical to compile an entire library/lot of functions as if every one could be an entry point. We may also actually include program arguments in the compilation if needed/if that makes sense. So in reality, even if we pretended to choose the entry point at runtime, I believe it would still need to do significant jit compilation. The piece that launches/does this jit compilation might as well add the entry point attribute. I believe that piece/logic necessarily runs to get down to a profile in the first place.

Author: @LaurentAjdnik Regarding the entry_point attribute potentially being attached in several places, I added the following paragraph: 

> Both the `"entry_point"` attribute and the `"output_labels"` attribute can only
be attached to a function definition; they are invalid on a function that is
declared but not defined. For the Base Profile, this implies that they can occur
only in one place.

This means that the program should fail profile validation if the entry point attribute occurs in more than one place for the Base Profile.

Within the restrictions imposed by the Base Profile, the number of qubits that
are needed to execute the quantum program must be known at compile time. This
number is captured in the form of the `"required_qubits"` attribute attached to
the entry point. The value of the attribute must be the string representation of
a 64-bit integer constant.

Similarly, the number of measurement results that need to be stored when
executing the entry point function is captured by the `"required_results"`
attribute. Since qubits cannot be used after measurement, in the case of the
Base Profile, this value is equal to the number of measurement results in the
program output.

> For a program to be valid, both the number of qubits used and the number of

Reviewer 6: => both `"required_qubits"` and `"required_results"` must be strictly positive? (makes it more straightforward)

Author: Same as my comment below; I find it confusing to use the name of the attribute when talking about the value of the attribute.

measurements to store must be strictly positive. More details on the usage of
[qubits and results](#qubit-and-result-usage) in general can be found in the
sections below.

Beyond the entry point specific requirements related to attributes, custom
attributes may optionally be attached to any of the declared functions.
Furthermore, the following [LLVM
attributes](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#function-attributes) may be used
according to their intended purpose on function declarations and call sites:
`inlinehint`, `nofree`, `norecurse`, `readnone`, `readonly`, `writeonly`, and
`argmemonly`.

### Function Body

The function body consists of two blocks, connected by an unconditional
branching into the second block at the end of the first block.

> The first block contains only calls to QIS functions. Any number of calls to QIS

Reviewer 6: A bit ambiguous. It could contain other things, such as any LLVM computations along these calls to QIS functions. As said below, the limit between the two blocks is rather when calls to output functions are first made.

Author: Yes, it is *really* only calls (aside from an unconditional branch at the end of the block). It is important to note that any constant folding and compile time evaluation that can happen does happen as part of compiling to a profile. The only thing that remains in the IR is anything that is truely only know at runtime (which really is only the result of a measurement or any expression that in some form or another depends on the result of a measurement). Since the Base Profile does not permit to do anything to a qubit after measuring it, it also means that all classical expressions will be evaluated at compile time.

functions may be performed. To be compatible with the Base Profile these
functions must return void. Any arguments to invoke them must be inlined into
the call itself; they must be constants or a pointer representing a [qubit or
result](#data-types-and-values) value. All function calls leading to a unitary
transformation of the quantum state must precede any measurements; any calls
that perform a measurement of one or more qubit(s) can only be followed by other

> such calls or the block terminating branching into the second block. The section

Reviewer 6: "terminating" => "terminator"
Should we make it clear that it can only be an [unconditional `br` instruction](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#br-instruction) in the form of `br label block2_label`?

Author: Rephrased and clarified that it is an unconditional branch.

detailing [qubit and result usage](#qubit-and-result-usage) outlines which
instructions qualify as performing measurements, and defines additional

> restrictions for using qubit and result values.

Reviewer 6: "qubit" => "qubits"?

Author: This was intended to mean qubit values and result values. Since that seems awkward, I will add the s.

The second and last block contains (only) the necessary calls to record the

> program output, as well as the block terminating return instruction that return

Reviewer 6: "terminating" => "terminator"

Author: rephrased and fixed.

the exit code. The logic of the second block can be done as part of
post-processing after the computation on the QPU has completed, provided the
results of the performed measurements is made available to the processor
generating the requested output. More information about the [output
recording](#output-recording) and the corresponding runtime functions is
detailed below.

> The following instructions are the *only* LLVM instructions that are permitted

Reviewer 6: And `br`?

Author: Thanks - I forgot to update that.

occur in the program hence depends entirely on the used QIS functions, as well
as the runtime functions used for output recording. Constant values of type
`i64` in particular may be used as part of calls to output recording functions;
see the section on [output recording](#output-recording) for more details.

For a program to be considered valid, it must make use of at least one qubit and
perform at least one measurement. The `%Qubit` and `%Result` data types hence
must be supported by all backends. Qubits and results can occur only as
arguments in function calls and are represented as a pointer of type `%Qubit*`
and `%Result*` respectively, where the pointer itself identifies the qubit or
result value rather than a memory location where the value is stored: a 64-bit
integer constant is cast to the appropriate pointer type. A more detailed
elaboration on the purpose of this representation is given in the next
subsection. The integer constant that is cast must be in the interval `[0,
nrQubits)` for `%Qubit*` and `[0, nrResults)` for `%Result*`, where `nrQubits`
and `nrResults` are the required number of qubits and results defined by the

> corresponding [entry point attributes](#attributes). Since backends may look at

Reviewer 6: In which case, why not say:
in the interval `[0, required_qubits)` for `%Qubit*` and `[0, required_results)` for `%Result*`

Author: I find that confusing; required_qubits is the attribute name, whereas nrQubits represents the attribute value.

the values of the `required_qubits` and `required_results` attributes to
determine whether a program can be executed, it is recommended to index qubits
and results consecutively such that there are no unused values within these
ranges.

### Qubit and Result Usage

The amount of available memory on a QPU both with regards to qubits and
potentially also with regards to classical memory for storing measurement
results before they are read out and transmitted to another classical processor

> is commonly still fairly limited. Any memory - quantum or classical - that is

Reviewer 6: "The amount of available memory on a QPU both with regards [...] is commonly still fairly limited" =>"The amount of available memory on a QPU is commonly still fairly limited, both with regards [...]"

"both with ... also with ..." ?

Author: Much better.

used during quantum execution is not usually managed dynamically. Instead,
operations are scheduled and resources are bound as part of compilation. How
early in the process this happens varies, and QIR permits to express programs in
a form that either defers allocation and management of such resources to later
stages, or to directly identify individual qubits and results by a constant
integer value as outlined above. This permits to accurately reflect application
intent for a variety of frontends.

> Ultimately, it is up to the executing backend what data structure is associated

Reviewer 6: "what data structure" => "which data structure"?

Author: I am not sure - that sounds odd to me, but I am not a native English speaker.

Reviewer 6: Not being either, I checked on Internet and, in summary, grammar websites tend to agree on this:

> Although you can sometimes use “what” and “which” interchangeably, there are certain instances where only one of these words is correct. 
>
> The key differences between “what” and “which” are how many possibilities there are and how much you know about those possibilities. 
>
> Use “what” when there are lots of possible options or when you don’t know how many options there are. 
>
> In contrast, “which” indicates there are fewer possible options. You already know that the answer is one of two things or one of a few things.

Up to you. :smile:

Author: Thanks for the language help. :) Updated.

with a qubit or result value. This gives a backend the freedom to, e.g., process
measurement results asynchronously, or attach additional device data to qubits.

> Qubit and result values are correspondingly represented as opaque pointers in

Reviewer 6: "Qubit" => "Qubits"?

Author: done

the bitcode, and a QIR program must not dereference such pointers, independent
on whether they are merely bitcasts of integer constants as they are in the Base
Profile program above, or whether they are created dynamically, meaning the
value is managed by the executing backend.

To execute a given bitcode, the backend needs to know how to process qubit and
result pointers used by a program. This is achieved by storing metadata in the
form of [module flags](#module-flags-metadata) in the bitcode. QIR does not make
a type distinction or for example uses a different address space for the two

> kinds of pointers. This ensures that libraries and optimization passes that map

Reviewer 6: " QIR does not make a type distinction or for example uses a different address space for the two kinds of pointers" => Not sure about the grammatical construct here.

Author: rephrased

between different instruction sets do not need to distinguish whether the
compiled application code makes use of dynamic qubit and result management or
not.

To be compliant with the Base Profile specification, the program must not make
use of dynamic qubit or result management; instead, qubits and results must be
identified by a constant integer value that is bitcast to a pointer to match the
expected type. How such an integer value is interpreted and specifically how it
relates to hardware resources is ultimately up to the executing backend.

Additionally, the Base Profile imposes the following restrictions on qubit and
result usage:

- Qubits must not be used after they have been measured. Which quantum
  instructions perform measurements is defined in the specification for known
  [quantum instructions](../Instruction_Set.md). For quantum instructions that
  are not listed there, we refer to the documentation provided by the targeted

>   backend that supports them.

Reviewer 6: This is going to make it tricky for QAT to validate this rule universally...

Author: I think sooner or later we need a more formal definition regarding what classifies as what. However, I also think we need a bit more experience value before we can do that. Instructions that are supported by a hardware backend should be listed in the Instruction_Set.md. This sentence regarding backend documentation is primarily intended for research tools (given how fast paced and diverse the needs are for those, I believe it is good to allow room for having all sorts of "out of protocol" experimental features there).

Author: After some thinking, I did end up editing this in favor of introducing what I hope is a good choice also going forward for other profiles: The spec now requires to add an attribute to QIS functions that are not reversible, and specifically to the functions that measure qubits. It is up to the authors of the target package that defines a QIS to tag these declarations appropriately, so in principle, what is or isn't reversible could be backend dependent. I am not sure whether the full spec should have specific requirements in that regard for the functions that are listed as "known quantum instructions", but it certainly defines a clear mechanism in the IR to deal with functions that are "outside the official spec" in an automated and clearly defined manner.

- Results can only be used either as `writeonly` arguments, or as arguments to
  [output recording functions](#output-recording). We refer to the [LLVM
  documentation](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#function-attributes)
  regarding how to use the `writeonly` attribute.

## Quantum Instruction Set

For a quantum instruction set to be fully compatible with the Base Profile, it
must satisfy the following two requirements:

- All functions must return void; the Base Profile does not permit to call
  functions that return a value. Functions that measure qubits must take the

>   qubit pointer(s) as well as the result point(s) as arguments.

Reviewer 6: "point(s)" => "pointer(s)" ?

Author: fixed

- Parameters of type `%Result*` must be `writeonly` parameters; only the runtime
  function `__quantum__rt__result_record_output` used for [output
  recording](#output-recording) may read a measurement result.

For more information about the relation between a profile specification and the
quantum instruction set we refer to the paragraph on [Bullet 1](#base-profile)
in the introduction of this document. For more information about how and when
the QIS is resolved, as well as recommendations for front- and backend
developers, we refer to the document on [compilation stages and
targeting](../Compilation_And_Targeting.md).

## Output Recording

The program output of a quantum application is defined by a sequence of calls to
runtime functions that return values produced by the computation. In the case of

> the Base Profile, these calls are contained within the last block of the entry

Reviewer 6: "the last block" => "the second (and last) block" ?

Author: I think that is made clear enough above, and  if there are three blocks then it is in the third block - so saying the last block seems like the relevant information here. If you don't mind, I'll leave it as is.

point function. LLVM provides a convenient set of tools to walk and visualize
the control flow graph of a program. The last block(s) in a function are easy to
find by looking for blocks without a

> [successor](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.1/docs/ProgrammersManual.html#iterating-over-predecessors-successors-of-blocks).

Reviewer 6: What is the purpose of mentioning this here? This is LLVM-programming stuff. We could add such tips in many other places around this document. Or simply remove it here.

Reviewer 7: Agreed ... this does not seem necessary in the context of a specification.

Author: Removed.

> The following functions are can be used to record the program output:

Reviewer 6: "are can" => "can"

Author: done

| __quantum__rt__array_record_output  | `void(i64,i8*)`      | Inserts a marker in the output log that indicates the start of an array and how many array elements are logged. The second parameter defines a string label for the array. Depending on the output schema, the label is logged or omitted. |
| __quantum__rt__result_record_output | `void(%Result*,i8*)` | Adds a measurement result to the output log. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is logged or omitted.                                                             |

For all output recording functions, the `i8*` argument must be a non-null
pointer to a global constant that contains a null-terminated string. A backend
may ignore that argument if it guarantees that the order of the recorded output
matches the order defined by the entry point. Conversely, certain output schemas

> do not require that the recorded output is listed in a particular order. For

Reviewer 6: "do not require that the recorded output is" => "do not require the recorded output to be"?

Author: agreed, sounds better. done

- a flag with the string identifier `"dynamic_result_management"` that contains
  a constant `true` or `false` value of type `i1`

These flags are attached as `llvm.module.flags` metadata to the module. They can
be queried using the standard LLVM tools and follow the LLVM specification in
behavior and purpose. Since module flags impact whether different modules can be
merged and how, additional module flags may be added to the bitcode only if
their behavior is set to `Warning`, `Append`, `AppendUnique`, `Max`, or `Min`.
It is at the discretion of the maintainers for various components in the QIR
stack to discard module flags that are not explicitly required or listed as
optional flags in the QIR specification.

### Specification Version

The required flags `"qir_major_version"` and `"qir_minor_version"` identify the
major and minor version of the specification that the QIR bitcode adheres to.

- Since the QIR specification may introduce breaking changes when updating to a
  new major version, the behavior of the `"qir_major_version"` flag must be set
  to `Error`; merging two modules that adhere to different major versions must
  fail.

> - The QIR specification is intended to be backwards compatible within the same

Reviewer 6: "backwards" => "backward" (consistent with prior use in the "Program structure" section)

Author: done.

# Base Profile

This profile defines a subset of the QIR specification to support a coherent set
of functionalities and capabilities that might be offered by a quantum backend.
Like all profile specifications, this document is primarily intended for
[compiler backend](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler#Back_end) authors as
well as contributors to the [targeting
stage](../Compilation_And_Targeting.md#targeting) of the QIR compiler.

The Base Profile specifies the minimal requirements for executing a quantum
program. Specifically, to execute a Base Profile compliant program, a backend
needs to support the following:

1. It can execute a sequence of quantum instructions that transform the quantum

>    state.

Author: That's a good point. We definitively need to define that in the spec. Yes, I would say that qubits can be assumed to be in a zero-state when execution starts (or after allocating them using the runtime function for dynamic allocation - which is forbidden in the Base Profile).

>    state.

Reviewer 5: This is a tricky subject in general. *Most* users want them in the zeroed state. However, to create qubits in the ground state typically requires running a routine where the qubits are _not initialized_ and initializing them. You would likely wish to express this routine in the QIR as well. Therefore I would recommend no assumptions about qubit state our made (unless there is an operation that specifically allocates a zeroed qubit) and implement state reset through a subroutine that is invoked prior to the "users" program in the QIR.

>    state.

Author: Agreed on the reality that having qubits be in a zero state requires logic to actually set them to zero. For the quantum runtime functions for qubit allocations (e.g. `__quantum__rt__qubit_allocate`), which are not permitted in the Base Profile, I would say/keep that they are explicitly allocating a qubit in a zero state. The question is whether this should also be explicit in the IR when static identifiers are used instead. I think that makes sense, but suggest to actually work this out as part of the entry point initialization and finalization working group. I.e. what kinds of initialization we have and what they must do is a broader topic which is currently under discussion; that workstream should define a suitable initialization function. I'll make a not that the exact name and spec of that function is tbd.

>    state.

Author: I added a paragraph, which should be updated when/after the runtime initialization and finalization workstream concludes.

  schema](../output_schemas/) does not make use of them
- the [entry point definition](#entry-point-definition) that contains the
  program logic
- declarations of the [QIS functions](#quantum-instruction-set) used by the
  program
- declarations of functions used for [output recording](#output-recording)
- one or more [attribute groups](#attributes) used to store information about
  the entry point, and optionally additional information about other function
  declarations
- [module flags](#module-flags-metadata) that contain information that a
  compiler or backend may need to process the bitcode.

The human readable LLVM IR for the bitcode can be obtained using standard [LLVM
tools](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-dis.html). For the purpose of
clarity, this specification contains examples of the human readable IR emitted
by [LLVM 13](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.1/docs/LangRef.html). While the
bitcode representation is portable and usually backward compatible, there may be
visual differences in the human readable format depending on the LLVM version.
These differences are irrelevant when using standard tools to load, manipulate,
and/or execute bitcode.

> The code below illustrates how a simple program looks like within a Base Profile

Author: fixed

representation:

```llvm
; type definitions

%Result = type opaque
%Qubit = type opaque

; global constants (labels for output recording)

@0 = internal constant [3 x i8] c"r1\00"
@1 = internal constant [3 x i8] c"r2\00"

; entry point definition

define i64 @Entry_Point_Name() #0 {
entry:

  ; calls to QIS functions
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, writeonly %Result* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*), writeonly %Result* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*))
  br label %output

> 

Author: After a lot of mental back and forth that is mostly related to being unsure that a clear line here indeed is precisely the right line also for more complex scenarios that I don't know yet, and of course consultation with a variety of people, we did not come up with a clear strong argument for either one. Ultimately, the decision came down to it being (hopefully) cleaner and more consistent with the rest to also break it apart and require a separate block. I updated the spec, and welcome any additional thoughts on it.

> 

Reviewer 8: It makes compilation and reading comprehension slightly simpler, and it's a non-breaking change to make this optional later on, if we become more permissive with block structure in general. Having not been a party to the discussions, my 2c are that this seems fine, if not completely necessary.

  tail call void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64 2, i8* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* null, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @0, i32 0, i32 0))
  tail call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @1, i32 0, i32 0))

  ret i64 0
}

; declarations of QIS functions

declare void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit*, %Qubit*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit*, writeonly %Result*)

; declarations of functions used for output recording

declare void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64, i8*)

declare void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result*, i8*)

; attributes

attributes #0 = { "entry_point" "qir_profile"="base_profile" "output_labels"="schema_id" "required_qubits"="2" "required_results"="2" }

; module flags

!llvm.module.flags = !{!0, !1, !2, !3}

!0 = !{i32 1, !"qir_major_version", i32 1}
!1 = !{i32 7, !"qir_minor_version", i32 0}
!2 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_qubit_management", i1 false}
!3 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_result_management", i1 false}
```

> The program entangles two qubits, measures them, and returns a tuple with the

Author: I did the suggested edit.

primarily useful for execution on simulators, debug symbols are both easy to
ignore and may be useful to generate helpful error messages for compilation
failures that happen only late in the process. We hence see no reason to
disallow them from occurring in the bitcode but will not detail their use any
further. We defer to existing resources for more information about how to
generate and use debug symbols.

## Entry Point Definition

The bitcode contains the definition of the LLVM function that should be invoked
when the program is executed, referred to as entry point in the rest of this
profile specification. The name of this function may be chosen freely, as long
as it is a valid [global
identifier](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#identifiers) by LLVM standard.

The entry point may not take any parameters and must return an exit code in the
form of a 64-bit integer. The exit code `0` must be used to indicate a
successful execution of the program.

### Attributes

The following custom attributes must be attached to the entry point function:

- An attribute named `"entry_point"` identifying the function as the starting
  point of a quantum program

> - An attribute named `"qir_profile"` with the value `"base_profile"` identifying

Author: That is an interesting question. I also expect that one program/function may be compliant with several profiles. My original thinking was that ordering relations of the form "profile A compliant implies profile B compliant" would be something that is merely implemented in a compiler rather than reflected in the attribute. However, thinking more carefully about it, allowing several values here is likely a good idea. I'll rename it to plural.

  the profile the entry point has been compiled for
- An attribute named `"output_labels"` with an arbitrary string value that
  identifies the schema used by a [compiler
  frontend](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler#Front_end) that produced the
  IR to label the recorded output
- An attribute named `"required_qubits"` indicating the number of qubits used by

>   the entry point

Author: Agreed. My impression is that this value is used by other people, but I'd gladly remove it as a requirement if it is not.

> - An attribute named `"required_results"` indicating the maximal number of

Author: Renamed as suggested. These attributes are newly introduced. We will update the full QIR spec to list these as optional attributes for untargeted QIR.

group](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.1/docs/LangRef.html#attrgrp) in the IR.
Attribute groups are numbered such that they can be easily referenced by
multiple function definitions or global variables. Consumers of Base Profile
compliant programs must not rely on a particular numbering, but instead look for
the function to which an attribute with the name `"entry_point"` is attached to
determine which one to invoke when the program is launched.

Within the restrictions imposed by the Base Profile, the number of qubits that
are needed to execute the quantum program must be known at compile time. This
number is captured in the form of the `"required_qubits"` attribute attached to
the entry point. The value of the attribute must be the string representation of
a 64-bit integer constant.

Similarly, the number of measurement results that need to be stored when
executing the entry point function is captured by the `"required_results"`
attribute. Since qubits cannot be used after measurement, in the case of the
Base Profile, this value is equal to the number of measurement results in the
program output.

For a program to be valid, both the number of qubits used and the number of

> measurements to store must be strictly positive. More details on the usage of

Author: After some consideration, I agree; how to handle programs that make no use of quantum resources is something that may be relevant for a service but not something that is dictated by the spec. I removed this requirement.

[qubits and results](#qubit-and-result-usage) in general can be found in the
sections below.

Beyond the entry point specific requirements related to attributes, custom
attributes may optionally be attached to any of the declared functions.
Furthermore, the following [LLVM
attributes](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#function-attributes) may be used
according to their intended purpose on function declarations and call sites:
`inlinehint`, `nofree`, `norecurse`, `readnone`, `readonly`, `writeonly`, and
`argmemonly`.

### Function Body

The function body consists of two blocks, connected by an unconditional
branching into the second block at the end of the first block.

The first block contains only calls to QIS functions. Any number of calls to QIS
functions may be performed. To be compatible with the Base Profile these
functions must return void. Any arguments to invoke them must be inlined into

> the call itself; they must be constants or a pointer representing a [qubit or

Reviewer 9: Do we see any need for constants of type other than "double" in the base profile? If not, perhaps restricting to double would simplify things.

Author: I can see integer values as being useful as well. I am not sure what benefits there would be to only allowing certain types? Even if we wanted to be more specific, we would still need to clarify that such constants can only be used in calls to QIS functions (e.g. recording a constant double value is not supported).

| `call`                   | Used within a function block to invoke any one of the declared QIS functions and the output recording functions. | May optionally be preceded by a [`tail` marker](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#call-instruction).       |
| `br`                     | Used to branch from one block to another in the entry point function.                                            | The branching must be unconditional and occurs as the final instruction of a block to jump to the next one. |
| `ret`                    | Used to return the exit code of the program.                                                                     | Must occur (only) as the final instruction of the second (and last) block in the entry point.               |
| `inttoptr`               | Used to cast an `i64` integer value to either a `%Qubit*` or a `%Result*`.                                       | May be used as part of a function call only.                                                                |

> | `getelementptr inbounds` | Used to create an `i8*` to pass a constant string for the purpose of labeling an output value.                   | May be used as part of call to an output recording function only.                                           |

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
| `getelementptr inbounds` | Used to create an `i8*` to pass a constant string for the purpose of labeling an output value.                   | May be used as part of a call to an output recording function only.                                           |
```

see the section on [output recording](#output-recording) for more details.

For a program to be considered valid, it must make use of at least one qubit and
perform at least one measurement. The `%Qubit*` and `%Result*` data types hence
must be supported by all backends. Qubits and results can occur only as
arguments in function calls and are represented as a pointer of type `%Qubit*`
and `%Result*` respectively, where the pointer itself identifies the qubit or
result value rather than a memory location where the value is stored: a 64-bit
integer constant is cast to the appropriate pointer type. A more detailed
elaboration on the purpose of this representation is given in the next
subsection. The integer constant that is cast must be in the interval `[0,
nrQubits)` for `%Qubit*` and `[0, nrResults)` for `%Result*`, where `nrQubits`
and `nrResults` are the required number of qubits and results defined by the
corresponding [entry point attributes](#attributes). Since backends may look at
the values of the `required_qubits` and `required_results` attributes to
determine whether a program can be executed, it is recommended to index qubits

> and results consecutively such that there are no unused values within these

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
and results consecutively so that there are no unused values within these
```

ranges.

### Qubit and Result Usage

The amount of available memory on a QPU is commonly still fairly limited, with
regards to qubits as well as with regards to classical memory for storing
measurement results before they are read out and transmitted to another
classical processor. Any memory - quantum or classical - that is used during
quantum execution is not usually managed dynamically. Instead, operations are
scheduled and resources are bound as part of compilation. How early in the
process this happens varies, and QIR permits to express programs in a form that
either defers allocation and management of such resources to later stages, or to

> directly identify individual qubits and results by a constant integer value as

Reviewer 7: Seems like the sentence starting with "The amount of available memory on a QPU is commonly still fairly limited ..." is somewhat gratuitous. This Base Profile definition will live for many years once it gains traction, yet within a few years that statement many no longer be true. I'd suggest removing it or modifying how it is stated.

> directly identify individual qubits and results by a constant integer value as

Reviewer 9: I agree. I'd go further and say that most of this and the following paragraph could be omitted, as they are mostly about background reasons for decisions made, which arguably don't belong in the main specification document.

> directly identify individual qubits and results by a constant integer value as

Author: I think some explanation about the two different kinds of pointers any what their purpose is needs to go somewhere. My suggestion is that the first two paragraphs can largely be moved to the full QIR specification, and linked by the profile spec. Thoughts?

> directly identify individual qubits and results by a constant integer value as

Author: I trimmed down the sections in the Base Profile specification to what I think is a comprehensive minimum, and moved the detailed considerations for why into a separate file.

> outlined above. This permits to accurately reflect application intent for a

Reviewer 9: "This permits to...": Permits whom or what to...? The application writer?

Author: A frontend. Some frontends don't require that qubit ids are specified by the application code while other do, or allow to do so. I rephrased the sentence.

variety of frontends.

Ultimately, it is up to the executing backend what data structure is associated
with a qubit or result value. This gives a backend the freedom to, e.g., process
measurement results asynchronously, or attach additional device data to qubits.
Qubit and result values are correspondingly represented as opaque pointers in
the bitcode, and a QIR program must not dereference such pointers, independent
on whether they are merely bitcasts of integer constants as they are in the Base
Profile program above, or whether they are created dynamically, meaning the
value is managed by the executing backend.

> To execute a given bitcode, the backend needs to know how to process qubit and

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
To execute a given bitcode file, the backend needs to know how to process qubit and
```

| __quantum__rt__array_record_output  | `void(i64,i8*)`      | Inserts a marker in the generated output that indicates the start of an array and how many array elements it has. The second parameter defines a string label for the array. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted. |
| __quantum__rt__result_record_output | `void(%Result*,i8*)` | Adds a measurement result to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.                                                         |

For all output recording functions, the `i8*` argument must be a non-null
pointer to a global constant that contains a null-terminated string. A backend
may ignore that argument if it guarantees that the order of the recorded output
matches the order defined by the entry point. Conversely, certain output schemas
do not require the recorded output to be listed in a particular order. For those

> schemas, the `i8*` argument serves as a label that permits to reconstruct the

Reviewer 9: "that permits to": Permits whom or what to? The backend?

Author: No, the tool that chooses the labels also needs to make sense of them, unless we want to dictate labels - but I think it is better to give autonomy to the frontend here. I rephrased this to "...that permits the compiler or tool
that generated the labels..."

order intended by the program. [Compiler
frontends](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler#Front_end) must always

> generate these labels such that the bitcode does not depend on the output

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
generate these labels in such a way that the bitcode does not depend on the output
```

be queried using the standard LLVM tools and follow the LLVM specification in
behavior and purpose. Since module flags impact whether different modules can be
merged and how, additional module flags may be added to the bitcode only if
their behavior is set to `Warning`, `Append`, `AppendUnique`, `Max`, or `Min`.
It is at the discretion of the maintainers for various components in the QIR
stack to discard module flags that are not explicitly required or listed as
optional flags in the QIR specification.

### Specification Version

The required flags `"qir_major_version"` and `"qir_minor_version"` identify the
major and minor version of the specification that the QIR bitcode adheres to.

- Since the QIR specification may introduce breaking changes when updating to a
  new major version, the behavior of the `"qir_major_version"` flag must be set
  to `Error`; merging two modules that adhere to different major versions must
  fail.

- The QIR specification is intended to be backward compatible within the same
  major version, but may introduce additional features as part of newer minor
  versions. The behavior of the `"qir_minor_version"` flag must hence be `Max`,

>   such that merging two modules compiled for different minor versions results in

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
  so that merging two modules compiled for different minor versions results in
```

  a module that adheres to the newer of the two versions.

### Memory Management

Each bitcode file contains the information whether pointers of type `%Qubit*`
and `%Result*` point to a valid memory location, or whether a pointer merely
encodes an integer constant that identifies which qubit or result the value

> refers to. This information is represented in the form of the two module flags

Reviewer 10: I think it'd be good to not give people the option in the future and just do dynamic/symbolic at all times, but that's something that can be dealt with later.

Author: Agreed that this is a good evolution to consider. Right now, I don't think we are quite there yet to make that step, so I'd defer that as a possibility for future versions of the spec.

named `"dynamic_qubit_management"` and `"dynamic_result_management"`. Within the
same bitcode module, there can never be a mixture of the two different kinds of
pointers. The behavior of both module flags correspondingly must be set to

> `Error`. As detailed in the section on [qubit and result

Reviewer 10: This mentions that the behavior of the flags must be set to error, and then immediately says they should be set to false which is a bit confusing. I think the sentence about its behavior can be happily removed.

Author: Module flags consist of three pieces: Their name, their value, and a behavior flag. This profile defines the requirements for all three. So I don't think it can be removed. Maybe I am misunderstanding your comment?

Reviewer 10: Ah, no, my mistake, ignore this - aspect of the actual module flags I missed.

usage](#qubit-and-result-usage), a Base Profile compliant program must not make
use of dynamic qubit or result management. The value of both module flags hence

> must be set to `false`.

Reviewer 10: Can we just not add the flags to the base profile if they're not going to be used anyway?

Author: What do you mean by them not going to be used? 

To give some context on what my thinking was: 
The flags are useful to have within general QIR (i.e. QIR that has not yet been compiled for a specific target). QIR from different sources might be combined into a single program at this stage, and the flags are intended to make this fail when one uses dynamic management and the another does not. Since generally the expectation is that targeted QIR is a subset of general QIR, if flags are required in general, they also should be present (possibly with a different value of course) in the profile.

Reviewer 10: Yeah that's fine, didn't realize they dealt with merging too.

execute, i.e., its successor. Execution starts at the entry block and follows
the [control flow graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control-flow_graph)
defined by the block terminators. Block names/block identifiers may be chosen
arbitrarily, and the order in which blocks are listed in the function definition
may deviate from the [example above](#program-structure). The final block is
terminated by a `ret` instruction to exit the function and return the exit code.

The entry block contains the necessary call(s) to initialize the execution
environment. In particular, it must ensure that all used qubits are set to a
zero-state. The section on [initialization functions](#initialization) defines
how to do that.

The successor of the entry block continues with the main program logic. This
logic is split into two blocks, separated again by an unconditional branch from
one to the other. Both blocks consist (only) of calls to [QIS
functions](#quantum-instruction-set). Any number of such calls may be performed.
To be compatible with the Base Profile the called functions must return void.
Any arguments to invoke them must be inlined into the call itself; they must be

> constants or a pointer representing a [qubit or result
> value](#data-types-and-values).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
constants or pointers of [Qubit or Result
type](#data-types-and-values).
```

Constants of any type are permitted as part of a function call. What data types
occur in the program hence depends on what QIS functions are used in addition to
the runtime functions for initialization and output recording. Constant values
of type `i64` in particular may be used as part of calls to output recording
functions; see the section on [output recording](#output-recording) for more
details.

The `%Qubit*` and `%Result*` data types must be supported by all backends.
Qubits and results can occur only as arguments in function calls and are
represented as a pointer of type `%Qubit*` and `%Result*` respectively, where
the pointer itself identifies the qubit or result value rather than a memory
location where the value is stored: a 64-bit integer constant is cast to the
appropriate pointer type. A more detailed elaboration on the purpose of this
representation is given in the next subsection. The integer constant that is
cast must be in the interval `[0, numQubits)` for `%Qubit*` and `[0,
numResults)` for `%Result*`, where `numQubits` and `numResults` are the required
number of qubits and results defined by the corresponding [entry point

> attributes](#attributes). Since backends may look at the values of the
> `required_num_qubits` and `required_num_results` attributes to determine whether
> a program can be executed, it is recommended to index qubits and results
> consecutively so that there are no unused values within these ranges.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
attributes](#attributes).
```

This seems like more of a tip to a QIR author/developer than a part of its specification.

Author: Well, the profile specification is also intended for maintainers of/contributors to the QIR targeting stage; this is also the stage that translates any dynamic use of qubits in the source language to static qubits identifiers if necessary. Hence, I think it is reasonable to call this out here (we are not making consecutive numbering a requirement, but there may be undesired implications if you don't). That said, this sentence is not specifically applicable only to this profile, so I may migrate it into a shared doc in a future PR.

[quantum instruction set](#quantum-instruction-set) defines the requirements for
a QIS to be compatible with the Base Profile. More information about the role of
the QIS, recommendations for front- and backend providers, as well as the
distinction between runtime functions and quantum instructions can be found in
[this document](../Instruction_Set.md).

**Bullet 2: Measurements** <br/>

The second requirement should be taken to mean that a Base Profile compliant
program does *not* apply instructions to a qubit after it has been measured;
instructions that result in a unitary transformation of the quantum state must
be applied before performing any irreversible actions such as measurements. It
specifically also implies the following:

- There is no need for the quantum processor ([QPU](../Execution.md)) to be able
to measure only a subset of all available qubits at a time.
- Executing a Base Profile compliant program does not require support for
applying quantum instructions dependent on measurement outcomes.

**Bullet 3: Program output** <br />

The specification of QIR and all its profiles needs to permit to accurately

> reflect the program intent. This includes being able to define and customize the

Reviewer 8: FWIW, I don't follow the intent of this first sentence.

Reviewer 7: Perhaps something like this would be more clear:

The QIR specification and its profiles describe a mechanism to accurately reflect program intent with regard to program output. The Base Profile specification requires explicitly defining program output by expressing which values/measurements are returned by the program and in which order. How to express this is defined in the section on [output recording](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec/blob/base-profile/specification/under_development/profiles/Base_Profile.md#output-recording).

Author: I took @rtvuser1's rephrasing.

program output. The Base Profile specification hence requires explicitly
expressing which values/measurements are returned by the program and in which
order. How to express this is defined in the section on [output
recording](#output-recording).

While it is sufficient for the QPU to do a final measurement of all qubits in a
predefined order at the end of the program, only the selected subset will be
reflected in the produced output schema. A suitable output schema can be
generated in a post-processing step after the computation on the quantum
processor itself has completed; customization of the program output hence does
not require support on the QPU itself.

The defined [output schemas](../output_schemas/) provide different options for
how a backend may express the computed value(s). The exact schema can be freely
chosen by the backend and is identified by a string label in the produced
schema. Each output schema contains sufficient information to allow quantum
programming frameworks to generate a user-friendly presentation of the returned
values in the requested order, such as, e.g., a histogram of all results when
running the program multiple times.

## Program Structure

> A Base Profile compliant program is defined in the form of a single LLVM bitcode

Reviewer 8: Worth noting, even if not important - we call out that a base profile program is a single module but then, towards the bottom, address the concerns of merging multiple modules.

I wonder if this suggests that Versioning should be addressed outside of the scope of any one profile.

Author: Yes, I think the question of versioning should be covered by the full spec. As it is, the full spec does not (yet) contain a paragraph about it. I intend to make a pass over the full spec once we have 2 profiles + the runtime initialization and arg handling spec'ed. I don't expect any changes for the base profile, but the phrasing may move into a different file that is then linked here instead of covered (only) here.

clarity, this specification contains examples of the human readable IR emitted
by [LLVM 13](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.1/docs/LangRef.html). While the
bitcode representation is portable and usually backward compatible, there may be
visual differences in the human readable format depending on the LLVM version.
These differences are irrelevant when using standard tools to load, manipulate,
and/or execute bitcode.

The code below illustrates how a simple program looks within a Base Profile
representation:

```llvm
; type definitions

%Result = type opaque
%Qubit = type opaque

; global constants (labels for output recording)

@0 = internal constant [3 x i8] c"r1\00"
@1 = internal constant [3 x i8] c"r2\00"

; entry point definition

define i64 @Entry_Point_Name() #0 {
entry:
  ; calls to initialize the execution environment
  call void @__quantum__rt__initialize(i8* null)
  br label %body

body:                                     ; preds = %entry
  ; calls to QIS functions that are not irreversible
  call void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* null)
  call void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
  br label %measurements

> measurements:                             ; preds = %body
>   ; calls to QIS functions that are irreversible
>   call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, writeonly %Result* null)
>   call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*), writeonly %Result* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*))
>   br label %output
> 
> output:                                   ; preds = %measurements
>   ; calls to record the program output
>   call void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64 2, i8* null)
>   call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* null, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @0, i32 0, i32 0))
>   call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @1, i32 0, i32 0))
> 
>   ret i64 0
> }
> 
> ; declarations of QIS functions
> 
> declare void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit*)
> 
> declare void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit*, %Qubit*)
> 
> declare void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit*, writeonly %Result*) #1

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
measurements:                             ; preds = %body
  ; calls to QIS functions that are irreversible
  call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, %Result* writeonly null)
  call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*), %Result* writeonly inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*))
  br label %output

output:                                   ; preds = %measurements
  ; calls to record the program output
  call void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64 2, i8* null)
  call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* null, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @0, i32 0, i32 0))
  call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @1, i32 0, i32 0))

  ret i64 0
}

; declarations of QIS functions

declare void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit*, %Qubit*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit*, %Result* writeonly) #1
```

This was required for successful assembly with llvm 14.0.6; llvm 13.0.0 and 13.0.1 also did not like `writeonly` where it was.

Author: Thanks! I meant to confirm that and didn't get back to it...

attributes #1 = { "irreversible" }

; module flags

!llvm.module.flags = !{!0, !1, !2, !3}

!0 = !{i32 1, !"qir_major_version", i32 1}
!1 = !{i32 7, !"qir_minor_version", i32 0}
!2 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_qubit_management", i1 false}
!3 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_result_management", i1 false}
```

The program entangles two qubits, measures them, and records a tuple with the
two measurement results.

For the sake of clarity, the code above does not contain any [debug
symbols](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.0/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/LangImpl09.html?highlight=debug%20symbols).
Debug symbols contain information that is used by a debugger to relate failures
during execution back to the original source code. While we expect this to be
primarily useful for execution on simulators, debug symbols are both easy to
ignore and may be useful to generate helpful error messages for compilation
failures that happen only late in the process. We hence see no reason to
disallow them from occurring in the bitcode but will not detail their use any
further. We defer to existing resources for more information about how to
generate and use debug symbols.

## Entry Point Definition

> The bitcode contains the definition of the LLVM function that should be invoked

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The bitcode contains the definition of the LLVM function that will be invoked
```

> when the program is executed, referred to as "entry point" in the rest of this

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
when the program is executed, referred to as the module's "entry point" in the rest of this
```

profile specification. The name of this function may be chosen freely, as long
as it is a valid [global
identifier](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#identifiers) according to the
LLVM standard. The entry point is identified by a custom function attribute; the
section on [attributes](#attributes) defines which attributes must be attached
to the entry point function.

The entry point may not take any parameters and must return an exit code in the
form of a 64-bit integer. The exit code `0` must be used to indicate a
successful execution of the program.

The function body consists of four [basic
blocks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_block), connected by an
unconditional branching that terminates a block and defines the next block to
execute, i.e., its successor. Execution starts at the entry block and follows
the [control flow graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control-flow_graph)

> defined by the block terminators; block names/block identifiers may be chosen

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
defined by the block terminators. Block names/block identifiers may be chosen
```

[Compiler frontends](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler#Front_end) must
always generate these labels in such a way that the bitcode does not depend on
the output schema; while choosing how to best label the program output is up to
the frontend, the choice of output schema on the other hand is up to the
backend. A backend may reject a program as invalid or fail execution if a label
is missing.

Both the labeling schema and the output schema are identified by a metadata
entry in the produced output. For the [output schema](../output_schemas/), that
identifier matches the one listed in the corresponding specification. The
identifier for the labeling schema, on the other hand, is defined by the value
of the `"output_labeling_schema"` attribute attached to the entry point.

## Data Types and Values

Within the Base Profile, defining local variables is not supported; instructions
cannot be nested and constant expressions are fully evaluated. This implies the
following:

- Call arguments must be constant values, and `inttoptr` casts as well as
  `getelementptr` instructions must be inlined into a call instruction.

> - It is not possible to express classical computations, such as, e.g., adding

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- It is not possible to express classical computations, such as adding
```

the pointer itself identifies the qubit or result value rather than a memory
location where the value is stored: a 64-bit integer constant is cast to the
appropriate pointer type. A more detailed elaboration on the purpose of this
representation is given in the next subsection. The integer constant that is
cast must be in the interval `[0, numQubits)` for `%Qubit*` and `[0,
numResults)` for `%Result*`, where `numQubits` and `numResults` are the required
number of qubits and results defined by the corresponding [entry point
attributes](#attributes). Since backends may look at the values of the
`required_num_qubits` and `required_num_results` attributes to determine whether
a program can be executed, it is recommended to index qubits and results
consecutively so that there are no unused values within these ranges.

### Qubit and Result Usage

Qubits and result values are represented as opaque pointers in the bitcode,
which may only ever be dereferenced as part a runtime function implementation.
In general, the QIR specification distinguishes between two kinds of pointers
for representing a qubit or result value, as explained in more detail

> [here](../Execution.md), and either one, thought not both, may be used

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
[here](../Execution.md), and either one, though not both, may be used
```

Attribute groups are numbered in such a way that they can be easily referenced
by multiple function definitions or global variables. Consumers of Base Profile
compliant programs must not rely on a particular numbering, but instead look for
the function to which an attribute with the name `"entry_point"` is attached to
determine which one to invoke when the program is launched.

Both the `"entry_point"` attribute and the `"output_labeling_schema"` attribute
can only be attached to a function definition; they are invalid on a function
that is declared but not defined. For the Base Profile, this implies that they
can occur only in one place.

Within the restrictions imposed by the Base Profile, the number of qubits that
are needed to execute the quantum program must be known at compile time. This
number is captured in the form of the `"required_num_qubits"` attribute attached
to the entry point. The value of the attribute must be the string representation
of a non-negative 64-bit integer constant.

Similarly, the number of measurement results that need to be stored when
executing the entry point function is captured by the `"required_num_results"`

> attribute. Since qubits cannot be used after measurement, in the case of the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
attribute. Since qubits cannot be used after measurement in the case of the
```

The comma changes the meaning of the sentence

Base Profile, this value is usually equal to the number of measurement results
in the program output.

Beyond the entry point specific requirements related to attributes, custom
attributes may optionally be attached to any of the declared functions. The
`irreversible` attribute in particular impacts how the program logic in the
entry point is structured, as described in the section about the [entry point
definition](#function-body). Furthermore, the following [LLVM
attributes](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#function-attributes) may be used
according to their intended purpose on function declarations and call sites:
`inlinehint`, `nofree`, `norecurse`, `readnone`, `readonly`, `writeonly`, and
`argmemonly`.

## Module Flags Metadata

The following [module

> flags](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#module-flags-metadata) must be added
> to the QIR bitcode:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
flags](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#module-flags-metadata) must be present
within the QIR bitcode:
```

- a flag with the string identifier `"qir_major_version"` that contains a
  constant value of type `i32`
- a flag with the string identifier `"qir_minor_version"` that contains a
  constant value of type `i32`
- a flag with the string identifier `"dynamic_qubit_management"` that contains a
  constant `true` or `false` value of type `i1`
- a flag with the string identifier `"dynamic_result_management"` that contains
  a constant `true` or `false` value of type `i1`

These flags are attached as `llvm.module.flags` metadata to the module. They can
be queried using the standard LLVM tools and follow the LLVM specification in
behavior and purpose. Since module flags impact whether different modules can be
merged and how, additional module flags may be added to the bitcode only if
their behavior is set to `Warning`, `Append`, `AppendUnique`, `Max`, or `Min`.
It is at the discretion of the maintainers for various components in the QIR
stack to discard module flags that are not explicitly required or listed as
optional flags in the QIR specification.

### Specification Version

> The required flags `"qir_major_version"` and `"qir_minor_version"` identify the

Reviewer 8: A significant question here - is this major version the major version of the _base profile_, or of QIR as a whole?

If the former, we should be all set thanks to the `qir_profile` entrypoint attribute, but it might be worth calling that relationship out here (`identify the...version of the Base Profile specification to which the QIR bitcode adheres`). Also - if there are two different entrypoints meeting two different profiles (because a new profile may specify a different entrypoint attribute), which minor and major version should be specified?

That is, should the major/minor version actually correspond to the version of _profile_ and thus be an attribute on the entrypoint rather than the module?

If the latter, what if we want to make breaking changes to the Base Profile after other profiles (i.e. major versions) have been published? Does that become a completely new profile with its own major version? That is, would BaseV2 possibly be major version 5, which might be much more restrictive than MoreThanBaseV1 which happens to be major version 4?

Author: Thinking a bit more about the discussion we had offline regarding whether or not to version profile specifications independently, I have a couple of thoughts that I wanted to capture:

- It is worth thinking carefully about what profile specific restrictions could make sense that are *not* at the function level. There are actually very few, I believe, currently in the Base Profile spec; 

  - how to label an entry point and 
  - requirements for specific module flags
  - requirements for qis/rt functions that are called by an entry point
  
  are actually the only two that come to mind - the rest are specific rules that either directly apply to the function definition/implementation only (like specific block structures, what runtime functions can be used, what llvm instructions can be used etc.), or what requirements module level constructs need to satisfy to be usable in the entry point (like QIS functions need to return void). 

- The following should ultimately move into the full QIR spec (i.e. it is not really profile specific, but it is not currently in the full spec and I needed it to spec the profile): 

  - Only the first sentence in the section on output recording is specific to the Base Profile - everything else really should go into the full spec.
  - The whole section on attributes is not really specific to the Base Profile, and can pretty much be moved into the full spec. The only Base Profile specific requirements may be that `required_num_qubits` and `required_num_results` should be optional in general and are required for a base profile compliant entry point.
  - Pretty much the same goes for the Module Flags section, where the only Base Profile specific requirement is that the value of the `dynamic_qubit_management` and `dynamic_result_management` must be false. 
  
Given that, my thinking is that a QIR profile ultimately defines rules for the entry point definition, and everything that is used as part of that, but that the rest (like how to identify an entry point) is captured as part of the full specification, and I would keep versioning in sync (as discussed in the SC meeting). I don't think this would cause issues for backends to clearly define what they support; the spec version number defines how the program logic is defined within a bitcode file (that may contain more than only what is necessary/required for a base profile compliant function), and the attribute on the specific function to invoke defines what profile it meets.

Reviewer 8: Okay, I see what you're saying, and I agree with that. I see how it makes sense to annotate the entrypoint rather than the module - although if the module can only have one entrypoint (per whatever is specified by that version of QIR), I don't know that I see much of a difference.

Given that the current paradox here is that the compiler must know the profile in order to find the entrypoint, but it must know the entrypoint to know the profile - if the entrypoint is defined as part of _QIR_ and not the profile, then the paradox is solved.

Further, it makes sense to me that profiles are all defined within one QIR version, itself annotated with these module attributes. To recap another point from our discussion, where it will get perhaps unwieldy for developers is when a breaking change is made _to one profile_ but not to other profiles or the overall spec, or is made to a part of the spec not used by a particular profile. This will particularly be the case as new profiles are added but not yet stabilized - SomeNewProfile may cause the BaseProfile to see several new major versions without any changes of its own. This is where we may benefit from version numbers attached to the profile as well (not just QIR), but that can be added later and nothing in this PR excludes that possibility.

tl;dr: sounds good to me as-is, no changes requested 👍

Author: Thanks for the discussions. I agree that we will need to gain some experience value in how to establish new functionality/profiles - it is hard to have confidence in their specification without having a reasonably complete implementation, but it is also unfortunate if any "real world testing" of a first implementation is not formally covered by a spec with a version number. I think we may just need a "prerelease version" of the spec as well. I think we can adjust how we deal with that as we gain some experience here. 
As a note, I made some tweaks to the phrasing to reflect that the invocation of an entry point as part of a full application (where the full application would also include the service submission etc) is not captured in the profile itself. That gives that freedom to use this profile in combination with different service features without technically being incompliant with the spec.

## Data Types and Values

Within the Base Profile, defining local variables is not supported; instructions
cannot be nested and constant expressions are fully evaluated. This implies the
following:

- Call arguments must be constant values, and `inttoptr` casts as well as
  `getelementptr` instructions must be inlined into a call instruction.
- It is not possible to express classical computations, such as, e.g., adding
  two double values, as part of a Base Profile compliant program.

Constants of any type are permitted as part of a function call. What data types
occur in the program hence depends entirely on the used QIS functions, as well
as the runtime functions used for output recording. Constant values of type
`i64` in particular may be used as part of calls to output recording functions;
see the section on [output recording](#output-recording) for more details.

For a program to be considered valid, it must make use of at least one qubit and
perform at least one measurement. The `%Qubit*` and `%Result*` data types hence

> must be supported by all backends. Qubits and results can occur only as

Reviewer 5: Why is this a requirement, it seems to be babysitting the user to a degree? I can conceive of scenarios where I am trying to test aspects of our stack where I would like to run NOP programs.

Author: I know certain backends do not necessarily want to deal with empty programs, but there were some other comments regarding this topic as well. Seeing the general sentiment, I'll remove this requirement from the spec so that a NoOp program is valid.

attributes #0 = { "entry_point" "qir_profile"="base_profile" "required_qubits"="2" "required_results"="2" }
```

For the sake of clarity, the code above does not contain any [debug
symbols](https://releases.llvm.org/13.0.0/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/LangImpl09.html?highlight=debug%20symbols).

> Debug symbols contain information that is used by a debugger to related failures

Reviewer 6: Missing verb between "debugger to" and "related"?

Author: This should have been "relate" instead of "related" and it is fixed now.
